Hello everyone. Welcome to a new episode of The
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lops, and
today I'm joined by your return guest, Dr. Vibe
Kwassen. And today we're going to talk about what
evolutionary psychology or even psychology more generally, also criminology
can tell us about political violence and the psychology
of people who commit political violence, acts of terrorism,
and so on. So, Doctor Rotessen, welcome back to
the show. It's always a pleasure to everyone.
Thank you for having me, and I believe it's
the 4th time I'm here, so thank you so
much.
No, that's true, that's true. I always love to
everyone, and we always have great conversations, so, um,
let me start by asking you, so how do
you approach political violence from an evolutionary perspective? I
mean, what is political violence from that, uh, psychological
perspective?
But political violence can very easily be defined, bluntly
be defined as. Violence that's perpetrated with reference to
with conviction of some political ideology, but one should
also include religious ideology. Um, BUT when you look
at what sort of phenomena and behaviors are included
in that again, it can get a bit more
difficult to define. So you can have mass shootings
and attempted mass shootings, and you can have political
assassinations and attempted political assassinations, which are easy to
define. But as it turns out, uh, despite decades
of studying it theoretically, empirically, and attempting to define
it and operate operationalize it, one still hasn't got
a definition of terrorism that everyone agrees. And that
you can easily operationalize and use in research, but
terrorism can be defined as violence or the threat
of violence perpetrated with reference to political or religious
ideology. Um, BUT that isn't the only definition, and
it isn't a definition everyone agrees on. Some would
say that it also has to include creating fear
in the general public or in specific targeted groups
of the public, but there are actually no definitions
of terrorism in the same way as one can
define political assassination and other mass shootings.
Yeah, and is there anything from the evolutionary psychology
of violence, and we've already talked a lot about
that in our previous conversations, that might apply specifically
to terrorism.
Yes, and mass shootings and political assassinations. So, uh,
political violence can absolutely be studied from an evolutionary
approach, and one has done that over the past
couple of decades. And as, as we've talked about
before, and you've spoken to a range of brilliant
guests and your audience is very aware of evolutionary
psychology belongs to something that we call the paradigm
of selection thinking. That means that we start off
with the general theory, modern theory of evolution. How
does evolution happen through the processes of natural selection
and sexual selection. That's the meta theory. And then
you have a mid-level of the selection paradigm, which
is evolutionary biology. And in this area, political violence,
um, you would use the usual suspects on this
mid level, which I'm sure your audience are, are,
are very familiar with, is the works of Robert
Trivers on the origin and function of sex differences.
Uh, BUT also one can use Hamilton's Hamilton's work
on inclusive fitness altruism, which he applied to also
then studying spite. But if we start with Robert
Trivers. And he believed that Charles Darwin's ideas of
sexual selection on males and females competing within their
genders, within their sex for mating opportunities. Um, HE
believed that was absolutely correct, but he felt it
was a lacking somewhat. So in his theory of
parental investment, he argued we should look at sexual
selection through the lens of parental investment. So he
wrote a paper on parental investment that I recommend
your audience read because that's the starting point for
a lot of evolutionary psychology work, including that on,
uh, political violence, coalitional aggression, war, but also terrorism
and mass shooting, whether that is coalitional, or you
have the lone actor. And there are 3 hypotheses.
That one can use. And I suggest we start
with the first one that came in 1985 in
a paper by two authors that you and your
audience are very familiar with, uh, Margot Wilson and
Martin Daly. I, I've talked about them a lot
on your show with regards to homicide, and they
had a paper already back in 1985, which for
evolutionary psychologists is seminal, but not so well known
outside. Uh, EVOLUTIONARY psychology, and that is a hypothesis
they presented in this 1985 paper called the young
male syndrome, also in the paper listed as the
dangerous young male syndrome. Have you heard of that
one?
Uh, YES, I think so. I mean, I, I,
I have Dr. Daley on the show back in
early 2019, and we talked a little bit about
the evolution of violence, and I think we touched
on that,
yes. Yeah, it's a, it's a hypothesis that he,
uh, he proposed together with his late wife Margot.
Uh, Wilson, and uh it's, it's a hypothesis that
he's still using currently in his, uh, homicide research
to explain, um, why most homicides are perpetrated with
a young male as the perpetrator and a young
male as the victim. And uh in the framework
of sexual selection and Robert Trevors and other evolutionary
biologists like um Alexander Richard Alexander, uh, it was
suggesting that because males are in a constant competition
for access to females. Like literally access to females,
but also those things that females look for in
males, such as the ability to, uh, obtain and
control territory, have resources, protect, um, these abilities, uh,
create this constant competition among males that females find
attractive, uh, um, through female choice. The the ambition
and drive and abilities to obtain territory, resources, status,
things that can translate into reproductive opportunities is selected
for among males more so than females because although
females, yes, they can also gain from competition, from
status, from accessing and controlling resources. On the other
end of the scale, there's a cost to females,
um. The fact that they go pregnant, that they
can You know, a woman gets fertilized, she has
to go 9 months pregnant, and then she has
to uh nurse her child, whereas males. You know,
they can take a shower and we're we're lucky
or not, because as it turns out, you have
a a male mortality rate, particularly among young males
because of this competition that you have. So you're
not that lucky actually rather than unfortunate sex. And
when you look at, uh, when you look at
the prehistoric records and what was it that young
males died of, it was this competition that can
turn very lethal. Now in the 1985 paper, Wilson
and Daley, they were focusing mainly on criminal behavior
and also homicide, but they do touch upon, um,
Political violence, um, and political status, uh, noting that
this can be translated into either fending off competition
of the males, but also accessing females that it
gives status and females find it attractive. And although
they were mostly concerned with the individual male, that
the individual male has got this psychology from his
successful forefathers, um, they were also concerned with something
that one in social psychology terms social facilitation. Is
that a concept you're familiar with?
Mhm, YES, yeah, yes, but maybe for the audience,
please explain it.
So that is the mere presence of others may
very well change your behavior. Um, JUST riding a
bike, you might be riding a bike at a
certain speed when you're alone. If you just have
other people present, you will cycle faster. And this
was research they did in the 1900s. And they
also then did some research, seeing if this social
facilitation. Does that occur in other species? And to
the great amusement of my students in social psychology,
they actually did this experiment with cockroaches where even
cockroaches, uh, will walk at a certain pace. Um,
BUT if you put other cockroaches there. It increases
their performance. So you can increase performance, um, but
you can also have more extreme behaviors in general.
And so in the paper on the young male
syndrome, which is the name of the hypothesis, um,
also that they term in the paper itself, the
dangerous young male syndrome, they talk about what happens
with young men. In the presence of other young
men, so you can use this hypothesis both to
study the lone actor terrorist, the lone actor who
does a political association, the lone actor who does
mass shooting, but you can also look at those
who do it in coalitions, um, but the point
is. If you use it to study this, you're
understanding the male psychology as more prone, not every
single male in the population, but males as a
group are selected to be more prone towards risk,
aggressive behavior, aggressive, lethal, violent competition than what females
are. So you can use this, you can apply
this hypothesis to approach, um, males. Overrepresentation across the
board on political violence, regardless of definition, regardless of
culture, you always have a male overrepresentation.
I mean, I, it even, it even goes beyond
political violence, right? I mean, any kind of violence
and any kind of. Or I guess at least
most crimes, uh, males are overwhelmingly represented there,
right. So this was then again, a hypothesis they
had the young male syndrome, the dangerous young male
syndrome that was first and foremost used to apply
the overrepresentation of males in criminal behavior such as
uh homicide, but it is one that lends itself
easily to political violence. And then in 2012, there
was a, uh, group of three researchers headed by
Melissa McDonald, who published their paper in 2012, who
also had a hypothesis also based in what is
the male reproductive role, physiologically speaking. What is the
male reproductive role, um, and they then had a
hypothesis which has become much more known outside evolutionary
psychology, which I'm quite certain your audience has heard
of, and that is the warrior syndrome.
The the male warrior syndrome.
Yeah. Are you familiar with that?
Yes, I think so. Yeah. But
many people have heard of it. They haven't necessarily
read Melissa and her colleagues paper, but everyone's heard
of it. It's one that has um. It also
gets used outside of research performed by evolutionary psychologists,
and they take it one step further and point
to the fact that um males operate in coalitions
very often their aggression is performed in coalitions, and
they point to that tribal warfare. Has been significant
in um shaping the male psychology as it is
today. In prehistoric times, what killed young males most
often was the competition, um, young male on young
male violence, but even more so tribal warfare. And
I mean, if you look at the numbers, I'm
sure you and your uh uh audience are familiar
with Steven Pinker's work. You've you've also interviewed Steven
Pinker, I believe, on how, believe it or not,
and I'm sure many people are not believing it
currently, but we are actually historically speaking. Living in
the most peaceful times, uh, because not only historically,
but prehistoric, um, violent violence, um, and men and
males and females have been selected um. In that
regard, but in very different ways. So males have
been selected. Melissa and her colleagues proposed are being
selected to operate in coalitions more so than females
have with regards to aggressing to uh uh aggressing
against other males. And so you will have warfare.
Yes, but you will also have things like just
more mundanely, the whole social psychology phenomenon of in
and out groups. So males will more often identify
more strongly with some group identity. And with that
group identity, um, they will contrast themselves more and
have greater animosity towards an outgroup than what females
have. And you'll have more coherency in that group
than what you will have in a female group.
Female groups can be considerably more fragmented than male
groups. And so when, when males have this coalitional
psychology, that will also explain. Not only warfare, which
males are much more likely to engage in even
currently, uh, but also the whole in out group
and so you can apply that also to the
study of political violence such as mass shootings, terrorism,
and political assassinations.
Um, BUT let me just ask you then, uh,
but there are instances where, uh, some of these
young males might act, uh, alone
or absolutely, because a group identity with us humans.
I mean, it was, it was selected for a
very different time than than we live in now.
I mean, we used to live in groups of
say 150 individuals, most of them related. And so
anyone outside that group was then tribal warfare, um,
a real existential threat. Uh, THIS is not so
anymore, but we're carrying the psychology of our forefathers
and foremothers. And so the internet. Can trick us
into believing that we are under threat to an
extent that we Factually or not. And we carry
these, uh, uh, the proneness for group identity and
hostility towards others, uh, to an extent which, um,
is quite unnecessary today. But the belief that it
is necessary is profound. And an individual can physically
have a group identity, you know, physically be in
a football team, physically be in a team of
supporters in their town, in their part of town.
Yes, but also the internet can create group identities.
So you can have a lone actor that identifies
to something that they would perceive as bigger. Um,
AND even those because A tendency we see is
with regards to political violence where you have a
lone actor, not a lone actor. Characteristically, Quite typically
has mental health issues and those who have some
delusions have delusions of belonging to something big. And
we have examples of that in my country, Norway.
Um, WE have individuals who weren't necessarily sane in
the period where they committed this act and a
part of their psychotic delusion. WAS that they were
part of something bigger. So even the lone actors
may very often have an idea on a psychological
level of belonging to something bigger. It just so
happens that these things don't exist.
Yeah, OK, so I, I mean this might be
a very complex question and I'm not completely sure
if it's something that even from a criminology perspective
you have enough knowledge to answer and if, if
not, it's not a problem at all, but we'll
see. Do you think that Um, political ideology, and
I'm not talking about any specific political ideology, but
just political ideology in general might play a causal
role in political violence. I mean, do you think
that, er, the specific political beliefs that people have
might cause political violence or that, Uh, those beliefs
or them being part of this or that, uh,
political orientation is more of a post hoc rationalization
that people use to commit political violence.
Well, both Martin, uh, Daly and Margot Wilson in
their paper and, uh, Melissa McDonald and her colleagues
in their paper say that the male proneness towards,
uh, political status is something that has evolved. Uh,
BECAUSE political status can fend off male competition or
otherwise also translate into reproductive opportunities as females prefer
men who have status who can access, control, and
share. Very importantly, share their resources. Um, SO this
drive towards political activism in males is understood by
evolutionary psychologists as something that has a reproductive and
and has therefore evolved. Um, SO the ambition, political
ambition. Is um equal to any other sort of
ambition that men may have with regards to something
that obtains resources, control, political influence. It all translates
into reproductive opportunity, um, and people who commit. These
atrocious actions do so often with a political conviction,
but not always, and they might have a yearning
for status and. Then you're more looking at that
the ideology is secondary to the status. That they're
looking for that would be uh that would be
your classical evolutionary psychological analysis is that this is
first and foremost about um. Status and influence more
than the political ideology itself. So humans are, you
know, a political ape because it gave a reproductive
edge in our past and it still does give
reproductive edge.
Yeah, I mean, I asked you that because I
sometimes get the impression that some people are prone
to political violence, not specifically because they are part
of this or that political group, but. But because
the kind of political narrative that the group they
identify with uses serves as a sort of justification
that they use to commit political violence and not
And I mean it comes after the fact. It's
not a direct motivation. It's more of a, as
I said before, a post hoc rationalization for the
fact that they want to or they feel prone
to committing politically violent acts anyway.
Um, BUT prior to the, the violent act itself,
obviously there will have to have been some kind
of justification.
Yes, of
course, but yes, it isn't, it is, it's in
human nature to want political power and influence and
status. Violence is a way of achieving it, but
the thing is that terrorism, for instance, is highly
inefficient to get what you want, whether you whether
your poli whether your ideology is strictly political or
has some religious aspect to it, a given, Mass
shooting, a given explosion, a given act of terrorism
is very ineffective, but what it is effective towards
is gaining not um notoriety. You will become a
face and you will become a name thanks to,
um, mass media, both the traditional media, but also
social media. Um, IT is. It is a way
of obtaining notoriety, um, a celebrium that you otherwise
wouldn't get. And, um, the what we see is
that you will have political violence on both ends
of a given. SCALE, um, any religion, uh, any
of the, the, the big religions lends itself to
being used as, um, a reference for committing a
violent act in the name of that religion. Um,
But the the the given person has perhaps gone
through a rapid period of radicalization prior to the
given act, um, and they. They're more likely to
be suffering. With regards to the mental health rather
than having some kind of, um, you know, coherent
political membership, uh, they won't necessarily have like some
kind of well thought through political platform that is
more when you've got the coalitional political aggression. Um,
THE lone actors very seldom that you will find
that they. Have some kind of political partisan membership
that is coherent. Uh, IT might be a one
issue subject, for instance, um, but, but across the
board, what you have is marginalized individuals who, um,
often experience social exclusion, mostly then from the physical
environment, from the community. Um, SEEKING then instead as
a replacement, which is a poor replacement and a
dangerous replacement on the internet, where there's then a
quick short period of radicalization. So it's more like,
um, marginalized social exclusion, uh, mental health issues. But
it is in human nature, uh, to aspire to
status and to you and and and in, in
a male psychology more so than the female psychology
to use violent methods that can be crime, that
can be homicide, but it can also be political
aggression. It's a part, but, but it's an it's
an extreme situations, um, and you can get more
like, The old fashioned, um, you and I are
both of an age where we remember terrorism being
like terrorist groups who did have a coherent partisan
membership with thought through political convictions, who would use
the threat of violence to get something that they
wanted, and then didn't commit the necessary the politic
act if they got what they wanted. That's, that's
an old fashioned idea of terrorism that we seem
to have been, we seem to have left behind
in. In our current societies,
mhm, but I mean in terms of um perhaps
demographics, uh, we have to also, of course, there's
the evolution, they evolved psychology, but then there's also
social and economic factors that can play a role
here, right? You're, you're talking about social. Isolation, there's
perhaps some of these people perhaps are also unemployed.
They don't have many job prospects or future prospects
and stuff like that, so they are in a
way, many of them politically and socially disenfranchised,
yes,
as well, right?
Yes, but with clear mental health issues. Um, YOU
see, when it comes to mass shootings that may
or may not be associated with some sort of
political ideology or religious ideology, and it can be
quite spurious as you were suggesting, um, uh, what
they, what they decide I'm doing this because to
justify 80% of mass shooters in Europe in modern
time have been suicidal.
Oh yeah, tell us more about that aspect of
their suicidality because er at least at first sight
it might seem like a bit of an evolutionary
puzzle. Why would someone er who would be motivated
to commit political violence for the reasons you explained
before, would also be suicidal, because I, I mean
if they are suicidal and if they die. By
suicide, then they don't reap any benefits from it,
right. Uh, WELL, there's a hole. Filed on um
uh suicidality and evolutionary psychological analysis of that which
we don't have time to get into. Um, THAT'S
an interview in itself. Um, AND it's a puzzle.
Yes, but we do have. Hypothesis, uh, attempting to
answer it, um, some suggesting that rather than trying
to have an evolutionary psychological analysis of why we
commit suicide and the adaptations, uh, that underpin committing
suicide, um, you have those currently suggesting Todd Shackelford,
I believe a former guest of yours, suggesting that
actually, um, the adaptations is not committing suicide. Um,
BUT this is when I was suggesting earlier on
in our interview that perhaps we should take a
look at Hamilton's work. Now Hamilton, you and your
audience will be very familiar with his work on
inclusive fitness and altruism. Why will the individual do
something that damages itself to help others? Well, that's
because those others we are most likely likely to
help in such circumstances are people we share a
genotype with. From our family members. So we're more
likely to do altruistic acts when it benefits someone
who shares our genotype. Now again, why, why do
we then help other people like donating blood, kidneys,
running into burning buildings, etc. Well, again, you have
to then look at the fact that we used
to live in groups of 150 individuals who mostly
were related to us. Um, BUT his work then
on altruism, Hamilton himself and I Greatly recommend your
audience to read this. He then used these principles
to also look at spite. We are willing to
damage ourselves as long as we're damaging other people
a little bit more. That's spite. We will take
a cost to ourselves as long as we know
we're damaging someone else just a little bit more.
Now, but still, anything with regards to. Um, WHETHER
it's homicide, suicide, altruism, spite, we have to remember
when we're using evolutionary psychology, we are not socio
biologists. So so, uh, uh, you know, I mean,
a socio biologists, socio biologists would be looking at
analysis analysis on a behavioral level. This behavior, does
this behavior make sense, evolutionary speaking. But in evolutionary
psychology, we, we analyze things on a, on a
psychological level. Now it psychologically men have a proneness
towards wanting influence, wanting power, wanting status, wanting celebrom
and not uh notoriety. Being known, being a name.
You're willing to do quite a bit to do
that, and Now I'm, I'm, I apologize for the
words I'm using now, but I'm trying to make,
get a point across, but then. For someone who
has no other avenues. Getting famous, doing something that
media is willing to cover. Where you know guarantee
they're going to show your picture, they're going to
give you a name, they're going to give you
what you crave, and you have no other avenues
for getting. You might try to attempt to kill
as many people as possible before you kill yourself,
or as it also happens sometimes, I said 80%
are suicidal. That means some of them kill themselves
before the police get to them. That means some
of them kill themselves before the police even enter
the scene. But some of them are also shot
by the police, and it's a phenomenon that they
call suicide by cop, that you do something so
extreme that you know that the police will kill
you because perhaps Shackelford and his colleagues are correct
in that. It is in human nature to not
hurt ourselves. It is. It is difficult to kill
other people and it is difficult to kill yourself.
And when you see these mass shooters, they often
have considerably more weapons with them. Uh, COMPARED to
the number of people they actually victimize, uh, uh,
certainly lethally victimize, um, because they might be taken
off guard at how hard it is for a
human being to kill another human being and how
hard it actually is to harm ourselves, to actually
kill ourselves. But it does speak to an absolute
desperation. It does, it speaks to an absolute desperation.
Yeah, uh, so look, we're focusing mostly on or
exclusively on political violence, but since we're also including
mass shooters here, do you think that what you
just said would also apply to school shootings because
there the targets are mostly children, right, who are
not political actors.
Well, we had a terrorist in Norway who chose
children specifically. Now he made the case that they
were the future of a certain political party he
believed was damaging Norway. Um, BUT the thing is
also that children are an easy target, um, but
you're also very, very guaranteed that media will cover
the case if you do. Something so grotesque. Mhm.
Yeah. And it also speaks to the mental health
of, of the person. Because I hope your audience
doesn't misunderstand. I'm not saying that we are evolved
to do these acts. Yes, of course we have,
what we have is an evolved psychology that means
that when someone is utterly marginalized and is struggling
with their mental health, we shouldn't be surprised that
on occasion these things will happen, and we certainly
shouldn't be surprised that these things happen when we
do have a media. That does reward these acts.
With celebdum. They, we, we are exposed to the
picture sometimes sooner than they actually are confident in
who the perpetrator is. Before we know anything about
their mental health, uh, names are given, and when
the audience, when normal human beings are given this
information. It can turn very ugly.
Uh, uh, SO, yeah, I, I was going to
just, uh, comment on another thing on that relates
to Doctor Daly's work, but before that, since you
touched on the media, uh, I mean, I, I
guess that you've already answered this question at least
indirectly, but should the media divulge personal information like
the name. About mass shooters and terrorists and their
pictures and so on. I mean, haven't, um, criminologists
and other kinds of related experts been warning for
a very long time that this can produce copycat
effects.
Um, AND. And you are rewarding them with precisely
what they wanted and why they did it. You're
giving them what they wanted. And we have just
had a case in Norway, uh, where a young
male just turned 18, um, commits a homicide and
is claiming that this, he's the one claiming this
was a terrorist act that he wanted to create
to create fear in a certain segment of the
population and the media are. You know, reiterating this,
they're communicating what he wanted to do, and they're
also showing his picture and his name. And there
has been, there's been one newspaper that has um
gone a different route than what is, what is
a normal procedure in media all over the world,
and they have decided not to show his picture.
Uh, I don't know if they've changed that in
the past couple of days because now there's a
court case, but this young boy said to the
media, uh, through his defense lawyer that he wanted
to have his picture taken in court, because the
early court procedures have started already. And he said
through his defense attorney. I want my picture taken
in court. That should be like the first sign
for media to, you know, maybe not. And they
have discussed, should they, should they not? And there
are arguments for why, because it's a serious crime.
Homicide is a serious crime. If this actually was
a terrorist act as well, that's a serious crime.
The public should know it's media's responsibility to let
the public know what's going on. But Yes, as
a criminologist, as a homicide researcher, as a violence
researcher, I'm someone who has read the literature and
all these decades. And I remember the 90s and
I remember the American experts being very firm on
like school mass shootings over there. They've had what,
300 mass shootings in the state so far this
year. Even the same week as a very famous
political assassination which overshadowed. Uh, THE mass shooting with
considerably more and younger victims. Yeah. One has to
ask, when will they learn? And there's only one
country that I see seems to be taking this
lesson serious, and that's France. About 10 years ago,
um, They find not, not, not, not all media
in France. This is not something that all media
in France agree on. Um, IT isn't like across
the board decision, and they the different news media
outlets, they go case by case, but some of
them have taken a very principled stance in that
we will pixelate pictures and we would will withhold
names. Uh, WITHHOLDING names is a little bit more
problematic from a journalistic perspective, from a trust perspective,
but pixelating pictures is a no brainer. Um, JUST,
you really shouldn't do that. And I, now I'm
not a journalist, and so I can't make that
sort of. Pros and cons, but from, from my
point of view, who, who writes about and does
interviews on what's the psychology underpinning these acts. Celebrum,
a want for, um, fame to the extent of
accepting that that's going to be not, uh, notoriety,
like a negative, famous, famous for doing something horrific.
It's such a strong motivating factor for these infringed,
socially isolated individuals who 80% of them in Europe
are suicidal, so they are struggling with mental issues.
Other, other of them are having psychotic symptoms, um.
Like we're having a court case in these days
in Norway of someone who was supposed to have
done a terrorist act, um, but as it turns
out, a couple of years later. He was so
severely psychotic because he hadn't been treated for his
psychiatric symptoms. And if he had been discovered prior
to his terrorist act, his, uh, his stepsister might
be alive today.
Uh, OH, OK. So, uh, I was going to
ask you another kind of question, but, uh, let
me then touch already on that a little bit
more on the topic of mental illness because I
guess that this is a very sensitive topic and,
uh, I, I think it's important for people to
get, uh, the correct information here. I mean, please
correct me if I'm wrong, but I think that
the correct thing to say is that Most, the
vast majority of people who suffer from mental illness
do not commit crime, but, but, but proportionally. There
are more people who suffer from mental illness who
commit crime than people from the general population. I
mean, is this the correct information, or
crime is a large category of behavior, um, but
if we just stick to mass shootings, 80% of
them in Europe are suicidal, and I think that
number is telling enough, uh, so. If we can
do more to avoid Infringement or the perception of
being infringed, trust in the political system, uh, community
engagement, mental health, uh, being taken care of, discovered
at an early age, and, and, and help being
offered. To more young men and also not showing
them on a daily basis that a quick way
to celebdom. To fame. IS to Kill other people.
No. So, uh, uh, let me ask you now
because we've been focusing a lot on males. How
about females? I mean, are, are there also female
are there also female terrorists? Are there also females
who commit acts of acts of political violence or
not?
You know, in modern history, 60% of rebel groups
have had female members. So yes, the typical male
warrior in historic times was males. There's no question
about that. Sometimes you'll get some. You know, the
odd. And I mean that in every way, the
odd article saying that females were warriors, females did
big game hunting. Generally no, generally no, generally, females
don't have the upper body strength of males do
on a group level. So small game hunting, yes,
but on occasion you will have formidable women. Um,
WHO didn't get pregnant and who could join in
in warfare, tribal or larger, and join in on
a wild game hunting, but they were so few
and far between that they haven't shaped. They didn't
become grandmothers like those other females who took care
of themselves throughout pregnancy and nursing. Um, BUT I
mean,
I mean like, like the Viking shield maidens. I'm,
I, I'm, I'm, I'm making this, I'm, I'm making
this joke because you're from Norway.
I've got Edward Monk on my wall there, um.
But yeah, few and far between, they existed, but
not to the extent that they have shaped, uh,
the, the psychology of women today or the physique
of women today, um, although you will on occasion
have formidable women. Absolutely. Um, BUT in modern days
when women can control things to a greater extent
than we could historically speaking. 60% of groups that
are termed defined operate operationalized that, sorry, uh, as
rebel groups, 60% have female members. Now what those
female members are doing, one has to study that
research more closely, but they actually have female members
at all. And you've got numbers from Europol showing
that 5% of terrorist plots in Europe in modern
times, current day Europe, 20% of them have females
associated to plotting those terrorist acts in Europe, according
to Europol. So, females. Do perpetrate, engage, enable, assist
terrorist acts and political violence, that's the thing, and
Europol and Europol and. The United Nations are continuously
on a regular basis warning about this and trying
to draw attention to it. But no, not to
the same extent as men. And that's the third
hypothesis that I promised in the beginning of our
interview, which was proposed by Ann Campbell, the late
Ann Campbell, the incredible Ann Campbell, uh, in a
paper from 1999, which I know I have, um,
jazzed about, uh, in interviews with you previously published
in 1999 called Staying Alive. And that's her her
hypothesis. Again, just like Robert Trivers showed us we
had to do, refer back to the reproductive role
of the sexes if you're trying to identify the
evolutionary origin and function and possible adaptive role of
a given trait. And she said that women have
evolved. Due to 9 months of gestation, up to
4 years of nursing children in our species, in
our evolutionary past in hunter-gatherer societies, we had to
stay alive, so we are selected, females are selected
towards hesitating against. Committing violent acts. However, um, throughout
her article, she warns against ignoring the fact that
women are capable of and do perpetrate violent acts.
She warns against just pathologizing women for doing it,
and you can use her work to also approach.
Female political violence, be it mass shootings, be it
terrorism, be it political assassinations, women can also do
this, and I haven't studied myself, but if there
are any budding researchers out there on female political
violence, my suggestion would be. That we know that
women are often on the left side of the
political scale, so you're more likely to find the
political terrorists there. Also, we know that females are
more prone to stronger. Religiousiosity than males you might
find them there as well. You also know that
on the left side of the scale, the political
violence will damage property, whereas right wing political violence,
it targets human beings, people. Left-wing political violence targets
buildings, and so all in all, there's great reason
to believe that females might engage. There is one
terrorist organization, ISIS, who has taken this more serious
than any politician or group of researchers with regards
to um um recruiting females. And that's the ISIS
in their caliphate. They were targeting with specific propaganda
targeting females to um to join their caliphate and
their movement. So they were targeting females on purpose.
And so Politicians and people who want to prevent
this and researchers who want to study it, they
should, they should have a look at the forgotten
female gaze in all of this because females too
want political influence, one status, um, and can also
decide to cause damage. Aggress with in that regards,
and the most well known. A terrorist organization. Um,
IN the 1900s was the suffragettes movement. Yeah. They
were deemed, they were termed, they were considered, they
were categorized to be terrorists, and they would damage
themselves for the cause of getting the right to
vote. Um, SO what Campbell says in her paper,
which I absolutely demand that your audience reads, is
she said that. If you appreciate the female gaze,
you can identify at what point does the scales
tip for a female where a female is willing
to perpetrate violence after all. Mhm. Because we are
not evolved to just be passive and meek. We're
not
Uh, OK, so I have one final question for
you. Um, I mean, which is more of a
general commentary. I mean, since you're a criminologist, this
is something that we've already touched a little bit,
I think in our previous conversation, but I would
bet, and please correct me if I'm wrong, I
would bet that uh this sort of thing bothers
you. I mean, whenever. Such an act like this,
um, I mean, terrorist act, mass shooting, and assassination,
some act of political violence, of course, or even
a school shooting, uh, even sometimes even before we
know anything at all. About the perpetrators, people start
immediately speculating, and they bring out their pitchforks, and
they are already saying who is responsible for this
act. It's this side or that side or Um,
or they say that it sometimes we hear that
from some people that it has nothing at all
to do with mental illness or with social and
economic issues, that doesn't matter at all. I, I
mean, doesn't it bother you that, um, how should
I put it? I was going to say that
society or the media allows for this kind of
speculation to run amok, but uh as a criminologist,
as a criminologist, doesn't it bother you that people
have this impulse or this tendency to uh get
to conclusions when the criminal. Process itself, I mean
what police have to go through, what investigators have
to go through, and then, and then the trial
and the evidence that people have to evaluate and
so on and so forth is usually so complex,
but people just don't care or don't seem to
care at all about that complexity.
And what you're describing is this tribal coalitional psychology
of in out groups. Uh, THERE'S a paper I
read recently, um, which I really enjoyed. Um, I'm
not very good at pronouncing, um, names from other
languages than the Anglo and Norwegian. Um, Moncrief is
how I pronounce it with my British accent, published
a paper in 2024. And he suggested that the
reason why terrorism is, um, so hard to define
is because scholars have a different approach than lay
people have. Uh, AND he looked at research, seeing
how Uh, lay people, you know, what will make
lay people more or less likely to categorize an
act as terrorism, and one of the things here
is that the research shows is that if it's
performed by an outgroup member, we're more likely to
say it was a terrorist act than if it
was one of our own. And his point, his
overall point in his paper, or at least maybe
it wasn't, but it certainly is the one I
remember that my the the the message I took
from it was, um, that because lay people have
ideas of what terrorism is. That suggests that both
perpetration and risk assessment. Um, HAS been selected for,
and we have therefore been under selection pressure to,
uh, not only the perpetration of political violence, um,
but also to do a risk assessment. So what
you're describing is people trying to do a risk
assessment, trying to figure out whether it was one
of their own or not. Was this a terrorist
act or not, uh, to protect themselves, to try
to figure out what has happened. But humans are
not very good. At this, and that's why we
have created professionals to do this for us and
I was doing an interview after a mass shooting
that happened in Sweden in February and I was
doing a Interview on a live debate show in
here in Norway, and the first question I got
from the anchor. Brilliant anchor. He asks me, um,
how can we understand the psychology of someone who,
who commits a mass shooting and then kills themselves?
And my first answer, unprepared, um, but it's a,
it's a, it's an answer to your question, uh,
is, um, if you want an answer, go to
research, don't go to social media. Social media is
dangerous on so many levels. It's dangerous with regards
to encouraging such acts. It's dangerous with regards to.
The aftermath of such acts. Um, SO social media
is a terrifying place. And I, and whereas I
would have hoped for, and I do encourage traditional
media outlets to stay sober. I think lately we're
seeing less and less sobriety from them, but, Yeah,
I think that I think that has to be
my long winded as always answers, as, as you
know, I, my answers are never short. I always
give answers that last like 150 minutes, and I,
I apologize to them. I've got very long winded
answers this time as well on your show. Thank
you so much for having me. And I hope
to see you again a 5th time.
No, of course, uh, and by the way, just
before we, uh, I end the recording, just to
let the audience know if they're not aware of
that, because I mentioned Doctor Daly's interview. I also
have an interview with Doctor Robert Rivers on the
show from 2019. So some of the things referenced
here, you can go there and listen from the
man himself,
from the man himself, the legend.
Yeah. So, Doctor Tessen, it's always a big, big,
big, massive pleasure to have you on the show
and uh, as you said, I'm also looking forward
to a 5th interview somewhere in the future because
it's always fascinating to talk with you.
Thank you so much for having me.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Enlights Learning and
Development done differently. Check their website at enlights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters,
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Muller, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyaz Olaf,
Alex, Adam Cassel, Matthew Whittingberrd, Arnaud Wolff, Tim Hollis,
Eric Elena, John Connors, Philip Forst Connolly. Then Dmitri
Robert Windegerru Inai Zu Mark Nevs, Colin Holbrookfield, Governor,
Michel Stormir, Samuel Andrea, Francis Forti Agnun, Svergoo, and
Hal Herzognun, Machael Jonathan Labran, John Yardston, and Samuel
Curric Hines, Mark Smith, John Ware, Tom Hammel, Sardusran,
David Sloan Wilson, Yasilla Dezaraujo Romain Roach, Diego Londono
Correa. Yannik Punteran Ruzmani, Charlotte Blis Nicole Barbaro, Adam
Hunt, Pavlostazevski, Alekbaka Madison, Gary G. Alman, Semov, Zal
Adrian Yei Poltontin, John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward Hall,
Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolotti, Gabriel Pancortez or
Suliliski, Scott Zachary Fish, Tim Duffy, Sony Smith, and
Wisman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georg Jarno, Luke
Lovai, Georgios Theophannus, Chris Williamson, Peter Wolozin, David Williams,
Dio Costa, Anton Ericsson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie
Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, Bangalore atheists, Larry D. Lee Jr.
Old Eringbon. Esterri, Michael Bailey, then Spurber, Robert Grassy,
Zigoren, Jeff McMahon, Jake Zul, Barnabas Raddix, Mark Kempel,
Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Story, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin
Gelbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brendan, Nicholas Carlson, Ismael Bensleyman.
George Ekoriati, Valentine Steinmann, Per Crawley, Kate Van Goler,
Alexander Obert, Liam Dunaway, BR, Massoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular,
Janus Hetner, Ursula Guinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsov, Sean
Nelson, Mike Levin, and Jos Necht. A special thanks
to my producers Iar Webb, Jim Frank Lucas Stink,
Tom Vanneden, Bernardine Curtis Dixon, Benedict Mueller, Thomas Trumbull,
Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carlo Montenegro, Al Nick
Cortiz, and Nick Golden, and to my executive producers,
Matthew Lavender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanis, and Rosie. Thank
you for all.